I'm like I reiterated things.
Tell him anything about it.
Transition to Scott Baum.
We also had the opportunity to talk to another acquaintance of Robert E. Howard, Mr. Scott Baum.
Nothing about Adam, his brother?
Let me get things cranked up here.
What are you going to ask me?
That makes no difference. So... Okay. Basically,
well, how long have you been living in Cross Plains? I've been living in Cross
Plains... I've lived here since 1922. That'll be about, good Lord, that's a
while isn't it. Yeah. I was a boy here and went to college and came back, took
over the newspaper, got out of college one day and took over the newspaper for
the next, and been here all the while. I retired from the newspaper about eight
or nine years ago. When did you first meet Mr. Howard? When did I first meet
him? Well, as a boy, I knew him here when he was a boy. Howard's about four or
five years older than I am, four years, I guess. I guess he would be about, I'm
70 years old. Howard must be 74, 75 now, I think. OK. I could check that out
for you, but possibly you got that information at hand. Yes. When did you...? I
knew him at...
I started high school. Let's see. I came in here, moved here from a nearby
town and entered high school as about a sophomore. In those days, we only had 10
grades here, and they were not affiliated, and Howard went down to Brownwood to
finish his high school work in order to be qualified, you know, to enter
college. Yeah.
When you came back to Cross Plains, after going to college and you started over
the newspaper— That was in July, I took over the newspaper in July, 1930. Howard
was here at the time. He was a young man some, I was 20 years old. Now Howard
must have been 24 or 5. He was writing for a bunch of pulp magazines, Just
Getting Started. And very few people remember the names of those magazines, but
it was Storm Street and Smith. They published a number of magazines like Weird
Tales.
Weird Tales was one of them, I believe. And boxing and Wild West and a whole lot
of stuff like that. He mainly wrote for Weird Tales but he also occasionally
wrote for... Is it in Ring or something? He occasionally wrote for a boxing
magazine too. Yeah, we were talking to Miss Laughlin, and she said sometimes he
would go down the streets there shadowboxing and sort of doing a little... Yeah.
I imagine that's more or less exaggerated. He, Howard was was a little on the a
little, uh, little, little on the odd side. He wasn't intimate with very many
people. They was rather aloof, but he was a big, robust man to me. He was a
combination of, uh, Edgar Allen Poe and Jack London. If you could put the, you
can imagine that two together. Yeah, he had those books in his library. So I can
imagine that pretty well. Uh, he was virile, robust, like, uh, Jack London. he
was a like Poe
he wrote a few poems maybe you're familiar with the one called The Temptress The
Tempter he wrote a very good it reminds you of Poe's Raven something the meter
of it is something like that he compares the tempter as a beautiful maiden who
lures him Her name is Suicide. Yeah, I do believe I have read that one. Yeah,
I'm sure you've read it. Were very many people in cross-plains aware that Howard
was a writer? Oh, they all knew it. I published in the newspaper, you know,
every once in a while. I'd say Robert Howard had a story this week, and Weird
Tales, or some other, those pub magazines. Yeah, they knew it. Yeah, yeah. I
take it, being a small town, I guess just about everybody knew everything else.
Oh yeah, that's right. and his daddy was a doctor here country doctor general
practitioner well thought off very popular and
his father was proud of the fact that his son was a gifted writer he talked
about it yeah
well let's see I'm about run through my gambit of questions here was there Is
there anything... any particular stories you know about Mr. Howard, being that
you were a newspaper man and everything? He might have had some exploits out
there. I remember the morning he killed himself very well. It was a... I can't
think just what it was. I know it's a warm season in the year. It must have been
summer. But anyway, early, sometimes 10 or 11 o'clock in the morning, I heard on
the street that Robert Howard had just shot himself. But I immediately jumped in
my car and ran down there and got down there, and a few neighbors had gathered.
It wasn't generally known over town, but the old justice of the peace was
standing there on the gallery, the front porch. And when I walked up, he called
me and said, Come here, Jack. And I stepped up there and he took me into the
bedroom and he pointed to an old Underwood typewriter and it had four lines
written on it there. And Howard had, when he had been told that his mother
wouldn't live throughout the day, he went to this typewriter, wrote these four
lines and walked outside and sat down in his car and shot his head off. And this
old GP asked me what these four lines meant. I'm sure you've read them all flat,
all done. So let me on the tire. The feast is over, the lamps expire.
Yeah, we had read it. That's it. I'm sure you've read that. To me, I've been
told since then by Sprague de Kemp that the lines are not entirely original. But
they were certainly original as far as I'd ever heard or anybody else I've ever
talked to except Sprague de Camp. Yeah, I imagine that was Howard's way of
putting it. Yeah, that was his valedictory, his finale.
Well, Mr. Scott, I can't think of anything else. Can you think of any other old
things? I'll tell you, you've got a fellow there in Odessa. I'll tell you, a
young man there in Odessa, you can pick up on the telephone and call him and
knew him.
...onward Howard. Have you talked to CS-4? Uh, no sir, we talked to Jack Scott.
Yeah, I know Jack. They're in crossplanes, and he referred us to you and your
brother. Mm-hmm. And, uh, what we were mainly just looking for are just some,
uh, oh, some interesting stories or any reminisces you might have about Mr.
Howard. Well, yes, I'd be glad to tell you what I know about him. I'll try to
think of some of the things that happened. He was, uh,
an unusual fella. I know that. And, uh, have you read some of his stories? Yes,
I have. What type of person was he? Well, he was a kind of a loner.
And uh... I'll just recount one incident. I don't think he ever went with a girl
at all. But he wrote some pretty outstanding stories.
Well, as I'm saying, And I recall some of the stories he wrote when he was in
high school, and they were really outstanding, but he never did. He really
wasn't in our group. He was kind of an outsider, yet he was readily accepted.
But I remember one time we were having a party, and I was running a little old
rental store there in Cross Planes, and we were having a party upstairs and
Robert came and we were drinking some beer, chalk beer or something. That was
way back before Prohibition, you know.
And I know he got very upset about that he got a little bit tied in and he said
that he would kill anybody that interfered with his hands. if his hands ever got
damaged by somebody else that he'd kill them.
Hello. Yes, sir. And that was just kind of the kind of fellow he was, kind of
morose, and he
thought he had a real bright future in the head of him. He's a writer. Yeah.
And I don't think I ever saw him after that until I heard he had, I believe he
committed suicide, didn't he? Yes, sir, he did. In 1936. I knew his father real
well. I didn't know his mother much. I know he was an only child, I believe.
And he never did enter into any of our activities very much as I remember, so I
don't really know what I could say to you that would help young men. Well, what
you've already told us is quite a bit of help. Why do you suppose he was such a
loner, being in from such a small town and usually everybody you know, does
things so much together in a small town. I don't know. I don't know. He just, he
could've been a great author, I think. He had a, I don't remember even what kind
of grades he made academically. I know I uh... took an idea he had for a story
and tried to write a theme on it and he had already turned the theme in and I
got in big trouble there as you know of trying to steal his idea. And... that
kinda... I never did try that anymore again. But I know he could tell a story
that But really, this was something about a bear... ...who got up in the attic
or something and broke through... ...and disturbed some poker players. But then,
I really can't tell you very much about Robert. Come to think of it, there's
another rider, C.S. Boyd, I don't know whether you ever heard of him or not. Uh,
no sir. In our town. Jack Scott didn't mention C.S. No, I don't believe so, no.
What did Jack tell you about him? Mostly he had worked a little bit for Jack on
the newspaper and Jack talked about what type of person he was, a vigorous man
although he kept to himself quite a bit. I wish I could recall more about that
party but I know he scared the hell out of all of us because he got real excited
and thought he was trying to damage his writing career or something by getting
him full of beer. I don't recall exactly what, but anyway, he said he'd kill
anybody that damaged
his hands in any way. I seem like I remember that pretty vividly. I don't know.
Maybe something happened there with his hands. Maybe we got in a wrass in the
match or something, I don't know. But anyway, he wanted to write with his hands.
That's very interesting. You don't happen to write like any other things that
you might have done with Howard back when y'all are living in Crossroads? Well,
like I say, he wasn't in our group. We went fishing and we went swimming in the
mare over there and we hunted quail, but he was never one of us. And how he
happened to be in this deal, I don't know. I don't think he ever had a date with
a girl. He was a nice looking guy. Very presentable and tall and well made. and
even if I talk to you, I can't really tell you anything much that I remember
about him except that I remember him being a very outstanding, that he would
have been a great writer, I think. Listen, what you've told me so far has been
quite helpful. We're putting together just bits and pieces of people who did
know him along with some research that some other people have done. Uh-huh. And
I'd like to go ahead and put your recollections of that party and some of the
other things you said into our program.
Well, that's authentic, but I can't quite recall the details of what happened to
his hands. Maybe we were arm wrestling or something, I don't know. but he got
very uptight about what might happen to one of his hands or his arms or
something. I guess that was the only time he ever had a drink of beer in his
life. It sounded like what we were talking with some of the other people that he
might've been kind of insecure. Well, I think so. He was an only child, I know
that. I don't know how close he was with his mother but I don't think his father
had anything to do with him. It was my kind of feeling, I don't know.
Dr. Howard was a real fine man, though, and I don't know how close they were
together, but I think that he worshipped his mother was my impression in those
years. And I don't know whether she died first or not, do you? Aye. She had gone
into a coma and was not expected to recover. Oh, well, now that's the reason for
the suicide. Yes. Because he worshipped her. I know I can almost be sure of
that, that he worshipped his mother. Okay. And I know that her condition affects
him very much. And I know that he was real afraid that something would happen
that he couldn't ride anymore. Whether it was mine or whether it was in his mind
or whether it was in his fear that something would happen to his hands. But
that's it, I recall, more vividly than anything else, and I've often thought of
it. I certainly do appreciate your talking with me. And I believe I was the one
that I believe that he could have strangled me to death there. I don't recall
whether it was me or somebody else, but it seemed to me like his anger was
toward me.
But I know he frightened the hell out of me. He was a very big and strong
fellow. Yes, very strong because uh, could have twisted your neck off Much like
the heroes that he wrote about Mhm
Alright, if you would, if you give me your address I'll send you a release form
and what that does is simply you give us permission to use what I've been taping
Oh, well that doesn't matter to me, I don't care whether you use or not I'm just
trying to be honest with you Yeah I have no hold on it. You can quote me any way
you want to. As I say, it's been a long time ago, but those are my
recollections, and I've often thought of them. You made a real strong impression
on me that I was in real danger there. Well, fortunately, you made it through
it. Well, other things have happened to me that I guess are almost as dangerous,
But then, anyway, that's what I remember about Robert. He drew all that with no
problems, apparently, and no attachments
that I know of to anybody except...